I'm a marine biologist and an explorer
photographer with National Geographic
but I want to share a secret this image
is totally incorrect totally incorrect I
see a couple people crying in the back
that I've blown the blown their idea of
mermaids all right the mermaid is indeed
real but anyone who's gone on a dive
will know that the ocean looks more like
this it's because the ocean is this
massive filter and as soon as you start
going underwater you're going to lose
your colors it's going to get dark and
blue very quickly but we're humans we're
terrestrial mammals and we've got
trichromatic vision so we see in the red
green and blue and we're just complete
color addicts we love I pop in color and
we try to bring this I pup in color
underwater with us so there's been a
long and sordid history of bringing
color underwater and it starts 88 years
ago with Bill Longley and Charles Martin
for trying to take the first underwater
color photograph and what they're doing
they're in there were old-school scuba
suits where you're pumping air down to
them and they've got a pontoon of
high-explosive magnesium powder and the
poor people the surface are not sure
when they're gonna pull the string when
they've got their frame in focus in boom
a pound of high explosives would go off
so they could put a little bit of light
underwater and get an image like this
beautiful hogfish myths gorgeous image
but this is not real they're creating an
artificial environment so we could
satisfy our own addiction to color and
looking at it the other way what we've
been finding is that instead of bringing
color underwater with us that we've been
looking at the blue ocean and it's a
crucible of blue and these animals
living there for millions of years have
been evolving all sorts of ways to take
in that blue light and give off other
colors
here's just a little sample of what this
secret world looks like it's like an
underwater and light show
again what we're seeing here is blue
light hitting this image these annals
are absorbing the blue light and
immediately transforming this light
so if you think about the ocean being 71
percent of the planet and blue light can
extend down to almost a thousand meters
so as we go down underwater after about
10 meters all the red is gone so if you
see anything under 10 meters that's red
it's an animal transforming and creating
its own red this is the largest single
monochromatic blue environment on our
planet and my gateway my gateway into
this world of biofluorescence begins
with corals and I want to give a full
TED talk on corals and just how cool
these things are one of the things that
they do one of the miraculous feats is
they produce lots of these fluorescent
proteins fluorescent molecules and in
this coral it could be making up to 14
percent of its body mass could be this
fluorescent protein so you wouldn't be
making like fourteen percent muscle and
not using it so it's it's likely doing
something that has a functional role in
for the last 10 15 years this was so
special to me because this molecule has
turned out to be one of the most
revolutionary tools and biomedical
science and it's allowing us to better
see inside ourselves so how do I study
this in order to study biofluorescence
we swim at night and when I started out
I was just using these blue duct tape
filters over my strobe so I could make
sure I'm actually seeing the light
that's being transformed by the animals
we're making exhibit to the Museum of
Natural History and we're trying to show
off how great the fluorescent corals are
on the reef and something happened that
just blew me away
this in the middle of our corals is this
green fluorescent fish it's the first
time we've ever seen a green fluorescent
fish or any vertebrate for this matter
you know we're like rubbing our eyes
checking the filters thinking that maybe
somebody's playing a joke on us at the
camera but the eel was real it was a the
first green fluorescent lll that we
found and this just changed my
trajectory completely so I have put down
my corals and team up with a fish
scientist John sparks and begin a search
in the world to see how prevalent this
phenomena is and fish are much more
interesting than corals because they
have really advanced vision and some of
the fish even have the way that I was
photographing it they have lenses in
their eyes that would really magnify the
fluorescence so I wanted to seek this
out further so we designed a new set of
gear and we're scouring the reefs around
the world looking for fluorescent life
and it's a bit like et phone home we're
out there Swit swimming with this blue
light and we're looking for a response
for animals to be absorbing the light
and transferring this back to us and
eventually we found our photobombing
collapsin eel it's a it's a really shy
reclusive eel that we know almost
nothing about they're only about the
size of my finger and they spend about
99.9 percent of their time hidden under
a rock
but these eels do come out to mate under
full moon nights and that full moon
night translates underwater to blue
perhaps they're using this as a way to
see each other quickly find each other
mate go back into their hole for the
next for the next long stint of time but
then we started to find other
fluorescent marine life like this green
fluorescent bream with its like racing
stripes wrong along its head and its
nape and it's almost camouflaged in in
fluorescing at the same intensity as the
fluorescent coral there after this fish
we were introduced to this red
fluorescent scorpion fish cloaked and
hidden on this rock the only time we've
ever seen this it's either on red
fluorescent algae or red fluorescent
coral later we found this stealthy green
fluorescence
lizard fish these lizard fish come in
many varieties and they look almost
exactly alike under white light but if
you look at them under fluorescent light
you see lots of patterns you could
really see the the differences among
them and in total we just reported this
last year we found over 200 species of
bio fluorescent fish one of my
inspirations is French artist and
biologist jean-paul Navi he really
captures this entrepreneur and creative
spirit and biology he
would design his own gear and make his
own cameras and he was fascinated with
the seahorse hippocampus erectus and he
filmed for the first time the seahorse
giving birth so this is the male
seahorse they were one of the first
animals to first fish to start swimming
upright their brain above their head the
male's give birth just phenomenal
creatures so we stayed awake for days
even put this electrical visor on his
head that would shock him
so he could capture this moment now I
wish I could have showed HMMWV the
moment where we found biofluorescence
seahorses and the exact same species
that he was studying and here's our
footage they're the most cryptic fish
you could be swimming right on top of
them and not see the seahorse they would
blend right in to the to the algae which
would also fluoresce red but they've got
great vision and they go through this
long mating ritual and perhaps you're
using it in that effect but things got
pretty edgy when we found green
fluorescence in the Stingray because
stingrays are in the young nazma branch
class which includes sharks so I'm like
a coral biologist somebody's got to go
down and check to see if the Sharks are
fluorescent and there I am I was like
maybe I should go back to corals um it
turns out that these sharks are not
fluorescent and then we found it in a
deep dark Canyon off the coast of
California we found the first
biofluorescence swell shark right
underneath all the surfers here it is
there just about a meter long it's
called a swell shark and they comb a
swell shark because if they're
threatened they could go down water and
blow up like an inner tube about twice
their size and wedge their selves under
under a rock so they don't get um they
don't get eaten by a predator
and here's our first footage of these
biofluorescence well sharks just
magnificent I mean they're they're
showing these distinct patterns in this
there's areas that are fluorescent in
areas that are not fluorescent but
they've also got these like twinkling
spots on them that are much brighter
than other parts of the shark but this
is all beautiful to see this you know I
was like this is gorgeous but what does
it mean to the shark can they see this
and we looked in the literature and
nothing was known about this shark
vision so I took the shark to eye
specialist Ellis Loew at Cornell
University and we found out that this
shark sees discreetly and acutely in the
blue-green interface just like probably
about a hundred times better than we can
see in the dark but they only see
Bluegreen so what is doing is taking
this blue world and that it's absorbing
the blue creating green it's creating
contrast that they can indeed see so we
have a model showing that it creates an
ability for them to see all these
patterns and males and females also have
we're finding distinct patterns among
them but our last fine came really just
like a few miles from where we are now
in the Solomon Islands
swimming at night I encountered the
first biofluorescent sea turtle so this
is like now it's going from fish and
sharks into reptiles which which again
this is only one month old but it shows
us that we know almost nothing about
this hawksbill turtles vision and it
makes me think about how much more there
is to learn and here in the Solomon
Islands there's only a few thousand
breeding females of this species left
and this is one of the hot spots for
them so it shows us how much we need to
really protect these animals while
they're still here and understand them
in thinking about biofluorescence I
wanted to know how deep does it go does
this go all the way to the bottom of the
ocean
so we started using submarines and we
equipped our submarines with special
balloon lights on the front here and we
dropped down and we noticed one
important thing is that as we get down
to a thousand meters it drops off
there's no biofluorescent marine life
down there below a thousand meters
almost nothing it's just darkness so
it's mainly a shallow phenomena and
below a thousand meters we encounter the
bioluminescent zone or nine out of ten
animals are actually making their own
legs and flashing and blink
as I try to get deeper this is slapping
on a one person submarine suit some
people call this my my Jack who still
meets Woody Allen moment where but as we
explore down here I was thinking about
how do we interact with life delicately
because we're entering a new age of
exploration where we have to take great
care and we have to set examples how we
explore so I've teamed up with
roboticist Rob Wood Harvard University
and we've been designing squishy
underwater robot fingers so we could
delicately interact with marine life
down there the idea is is that most of
our technologies to explore the deep
ocean come from oil and gas and military
who you know they're not really caring
to be gentle some corals could be a
thousand years old you wanna you don't
want to just go and crush them with a
big claw so my dream is something like
this I'm at night I'm in a submarine
I have force-feedback gloves and I could
delicately set up a lab in the front of
my submarine where the squishy robot
fingers are delicately collecting and
putting things in jar and we could
conduct our research back to the
powerful applied applications here
you're looking at a living brain that's
using the DNA of fluorescent marine
creatures this one from jellyfish and
corals to illuminate the living brain
and see its connections it's funny that
we're using RGB just to kind of satisfy
our own human intuition so we could see
our brains better and even more
mind-blowing is my close colleague
Vincent Pierre bone at Yale who is
actually designed and engineered a
fluorescent protein that responds to
voltage so he could see when a single
neuron fires you're essentially looking
at a portal into consciousness that was
designed by marine creatures so this
brings me all back to perspective and
relationship and from deep space our
universe looks like a human brain cell
and then here we are in the deep ocean
and we're finding marine creatures and
cells that can illuminate the human mind
and it's my hope that with illuminated
Minds we could ponder the over
marking interconnectedness of all life
and fathom how much more lies in store
if we keep our oceans healthy thank you